Title: Failure To Rescue – Rapid Response Systems
Source: NCBI Bookshelf (National Library of Medicine, NIH)
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK603026/

Failure to rescue is the term commonly used to describe failure or delay in recognizing and responding to a hospitalized patient experiencing unexpected deterioration. In patients on general hospital wards, unexpected deterioration, complicated by failure to rescue, may result in cardiorespiratory arrest, which can cause additional morbidity and mortality. These events may be heralded by clear premonitory signs and symptoms that create opportunities to recognize the deterioration in a timely manner, intervene to stabilize the patient, and halt the clinical deterioration. Rapid response systems were developed to respond to early warnings of unexpected deterioration.
Rapid response systems (RRS) were implemented in the mid-1990s to address the problem of unexpected and unrecognized clinical deterioration on general hospital wards with the goal of preventing cardiorespiratory arrests. Activation criteria were generated using data gathered from studies that defined the premonitory signs and symptoms of cardiorespiratory arrest. General ward staff were educated on the importance of early recognition of the signs and symptoms of clinical deterioration, and how to activate the response team if and when patients met activation criteria.
Abnormal vital signs often precede critical deterioration for hours before events such as cardiac arrests occur. These leading indicators create the potential for windows wherein severe adverse clinical events can be avoided with appropriate intervention. Clinical deterioration outside of an ICU setting creates a mismatch between patient care needs and the resources available. Rapid response systems are designed to capitalize on these windows through early detection of clinical deterioration and responding to potential events by moving critical resources to the patient.
Since the Making Healthcare Safer (MHS) III report was completed in 2019, the number and type of studies examining the impact of rapid response systems in the United States has shifted to include a substantial number of studies examining how either the afferent limb or efferent limb or both components of rapid response systems might be improved to achieve better outcomes. Specifically, the number of publications has increased from one identified in MHS III that compared a resident led rapid response system to an attending physician led rapid response system, to fourteen in this review.
Only one systematic review with a meta-analysis has been published since the MHS III report and most of the studies included in that systematic review were not done in United States hospitals. The meta-analysis presented in that systematic review found overall benefit from rapid response systems for both hospital mortality and the incidence of cardiorespiratory arrest though there was heterogeneity in these outcomes across hospitals. Most hospitals achieved substantial reductions while a few others did not experience any reduction in these outcomes. This is consistent with the previously published systematic reviews, but stands in contrast to a Cochrane systematic review included here, which showed no beneficial effect from implementation of a rapid response system for any of the outcomes examined. This Cochrane review excluded many studies that were included in the other systematic reviews due to extremely stringent inclusion criteria which may explain their divergent conclusions. The other systematic reviews with meta-analyses, including the one identified in our review, found that rapid response systems are associated with a statistically significant 10–15 percent risk reduction in hospital mortality and a 35–40 percent risk reduction in the incidence of cardiorespiratory arrest. The impact of the rapid response systems on transition to a higher level of care (unanticipated ICU admission typically) is much less clear. However, these reviews are in agreement with the Cochrane study regarding the low or very low quality and high risk of bias of their included primary studies.
In our review of primary studies examining the impact of rapid response systems on mortality, one study in adults found no benefit while all of the others, including the pediatric studies, found benefit. For the incidence of cardiorespiratory arrest, only two studies used a definition that is consistent with previous studies and the MHS III report. One study found benefit while the other study, which was in a restricted patient population, (and therefore possibly not generally applicable), found no benefit. The impact on transition to a higher level of care was highly variable.
We conclude that rapid response systems may have a large impact on hospital mortality and an even greater impact on the incidence of cardiorespiratory arrest. We base these conclusions on the clinical impact that the measured reductions would have. A ten percent reduction in mortality is clinically important. It means that 1 out of every 15 patients who would otherwise die will survive. Given that overall ICU mortality in the United States for adult patients is between 10 percent and 29 percent, and the overall mortality rate for pediatric ICU patients ranges from 2 percent to 6 percent nd mortality from cardiorespiratory arrest is approximately 70 percent, these reductions are clinically important and large. Unfortunately, the quality of the data supporting all of these conclusions and the certainty of the conclusions is low due to methodological weaknesses.
We can draw no conclusion regarding the impact on unanticipated transfer to a higher level of care. If a rapid response system can effectively respond and stabilize patients on the general ward, unanticipated ICU admission may go down. Alternatively, the need for transfer to an ICU may increase due to better response to life threatening deterioration that might otherwise progress to arrest and death.
As rapid response systems mature, many institutions are implementing modifications to their programs to achieve success where they previously failed or for achieving greater success in hospitals that still see room for further improvement. We conclude that implementing modifications to rapid response systems, both in the afferent and efferent limbs, is warranted and yields positive results. The afferent limb has been the focus of most of the research on how to improve rapid response systems and deterioration recognition/response, in general. Studies focused on monitoring and early warning system strategies are numerous, but a more limited set of studies have directly linked implementation of any one or more strategies to clinical outcomes prospectively. Studies that did do this, either alone or in combination with other modifications to the afferent limb, resulted in mortality improvements in all primary studies we identified, with several reaching statistical significance. The data was more limited for cardiorespiratory arrest but also found a large benefit. Modifications to the efferent limb also resulted in reductions in the risk of mortality and the incidence of cardiorespiratory arrest in all of the primary studies reporting these two outcomes. These results were statistically significant in all studies reporting statistical analysis. Transfer to higher level of care was not consistently affected by afferent or efferent limb modifications.
Family-initiated rapid response system (FIRRS) activation is an afferent limb modification that deserves more attention. While FIRRS should be analyzed in comparison to clinician activation so both can learn from each other to improve care and outcomes, we suggest that FIRRS programs should also be examined through a different perspective as well, since the underlying reasons described for FIRRS activations are often quite different. Clinician activation is usually driven by physiological instability. While physiological instability may also be present during a FIRRS activation, family activation occurs primarily because of poor pain management and lack of communication regarding the plan of care. It may be appropriate to compare family activations across hospitals to each other, in addition to comparisons to clinician activations, to learn how to better engage family members in the afferent limb. Family activation is likely a marker for poor communication with clinical staff and may even be influenced by social determinants of health. Family activation may give families a tool when they believe the health system is failing them and more in-depth analysis is required. However, it is also essential to compare family-initiated and clinician-initiated activations when there is physiological instability to understand if and how families recognize subtle signs, such as mental status change, better than clinicians, how they translate this into a FIRRS activation, and how to best use this to the patient’s benefit.
Rapid response systems may have unintended consequences, most notably, a risk to ICU patients when an efferent limb staffing model is implemented that pulls critical care nurses from their primary responsibility of caring for ICU patients. This was a common model described in the publications we identified, but it may not be the most common model nationally. Whether this unintended consequence applies to other ICU providers (physicians, respiratory therapists, etc.) is unknown. While we did not identify any studies in our review on cost-effectiveness or financial costs, the authors reporting on these unintended consequences noted that ameliorating some of these risks to ICU patients would require different efferent limb staffing approaches that may engender additional full-time employee salaries.
Overall, rapid response systems appear to be effective in reducing mortality and the incidence of cardiorespiratory arrest. However, not every hospital or patient population benefits equally. This may result from differences between hospitals in the culture of safety and teamwork or resources (human, monitoring, data collection and analysis, financial) available. Heterogeneity in outcomes may also be secondary to local deficiencies and limitations in the afferent and efferent limbs. Some patient populations may have an inherently lower risk of deterioration limiting impact. Unfortunately, these issues are only recently being evaluated in the literature. Ongoing research on developing improvements in the afferent and efferent limb should help to enhance the benefit of rapid response systems and, hopefully, ensure that all hospitals and patient populations experience improved outcomes. Other areas that deserve more attention include barriers and facilitators encountered, resources required, and updated toolkits to support the implementation process.
Limitations
The quality of the rapid response systems literature is generally low and limited by significant heterogeneity and risk of bias, with no studies presenting a low risk of bias. For example, while the Danesh et al. (2019) study had a low risk of bias assessment in 6 of the 7 domains, this study had an overall moderate risk of bias due to concern for bias in the selection of reported results. Many other studies had a critical risk of bias because of concerns due to confounding factors, such as Bavare et al. (2018) where this information was lacking. Primary studies often draw conclusions with limited or no statistical analysis. All primary studies are observational though some apply cluster randomization designs. Because of these reasons we can only report associations not causality and these are reported with low certainty.
Some of the studies included older data that may not reflect the current state of the systems. However, this review still helps to provide insight about how rapid response systems have matured in recent years because we focused on studies that assessed afferent and efferent limb modifications in existing rapid response systems.
Another limitation to consider is that this analysis deconstructed systems that have integrated and possibly interdependent components between the afferent and efferent limbs. While that distinction is important and informative, it may also have limited the ability to determine the effectiveness of the intervention as a unified whole.
Our review is also limited in that we restricted eligible publications to recent primary studies performed in the United States or reviews that included primary studies in the United States. We realize that studies of rapid response systems have been done in other countries over the last 5 years. While many of these health systems bear close resemblance to ours, this limitation is also a strength for those who seek a focused perspective on the effectiveness of rapid response systems in the United States.
Implications for Clinical Practice and Future Research
Future efforts should focus on improving the quality of research in this area by addressing better study design, reporting both numerator and denominator data in a standardized and consistent manner and improving statistical analysis to justify conclusions made by investigators. In general, including comprehensive data elements and providing better statistical analysis could improve the quality of studies of rapid response systems. While the inherent difficulties of using randomization methods in rapid response system study design may limit the types of data that can be collected, there is much room for improvement in the science on rapid response systems.
Despite the limitations, low quality of many studies, and the heterogeneity in results, rapid response system appear to be effective. Given the limited number of studies examining the implementation of a rapid response system where one did not previously exist, we conclude that there are few hospitals in the United States without some type of rapid response system. However, there appears to be much opportunity for improvement in outcomes and processes. The measured effect that rapid response systems have on outcomes has not changed over the course of time as calculated by the several published meta-analyses; achieving greater effectiveness will require further research into modifications in both the afferent and efferent limbs. Hospitals should consider carefully how they staff the efferent limb given the risk that staffing the rapid response team with dual role ICU providers may have for patients already in the ICU. While there are no direct comparisons of an afferent limb modification against an efferent limb modification, based on our review, we suggest afferent limb modifications should be considered first, especially the application of early warning system scoring.

